+++
date = "2016-10-13T23:26:19+01:00"
course = "(ISC)²"
module = "CCSP (Certified Cloud Security Professional)"
title = "1. Architectural Concepts and Design Requirements"
latex = true
+++

# Introduction

The building blocks necessary to develop cloud-based systems.


# Objectives

* Define the various roles, characteristics, and technologies as they relate to cloud computing concepts.
* Describe cloud computing concepts as they relate to cloud computing activities, capabilities, categories, models, and cross-cutting aspects.
* Identify the design principles necessary for secure cloud computing.
* Define the various design principles for the different types of cloud categories.
* Identify criteria specific to national, international, and industry for certifying trusted cloud services.
* Identify criteria specific to the system and subsystem product certification.


# Definitions

* **Cloud computing** is the use of Internet-based computing resources, typically "as a service", to allow internal or external customers to consume where scalabale and elastic information technology (IT) enabled capabilities are provided.

* A **Managed Service Provider (MSP)** tends to have:
  * Network Operations Center (NOC) service.
  * Help desk service.
  * Remote monitoring and management of all or most of the objects for the customer.
  * Proactive maintenance of the objects under management for the customer.
  * Delivery of these solutions with a predictable billing model, the customer knows what the IT management expense will be.
  * e.g. [Armor](https://www.armor.com/)

* A **Cloud Service Provider (CSP)** dictates the technology and operational procedures made available. The CSP offers cloud computing through Software as a Service (SaaS), Infastructure as a Service (IaaS), or Platform as a Service (PaaS).
  * e.g. AWS, GCP, Azure

* **Anything as a Service (XaaS)** is the growing diversity of services available over the internet via cloud computing instead of being provided locally or on-prem.
* **Apache CloudStack**: An open source cloud computing and IaaS platform.
* **Business continuity**: The capability of an organisation to continue deliver of products or services at acceptable pre-defined levels following the loss of a service.
* **Business continuity management**: A management process that identifies potential threats and impacts to business operation and how to alleviate them in the interest of key stakeholders, reputation etc.
* **Business continuity plan**: The strategy to continue business operations in the event of threats happening.
* **Cloud app**: (*Cloud application*), a software application that is never installed on a local computer. It is accessed via the internet.
* **Cloud Application Management for Platforms (CAMP)** is a specification designed to ease management of applications (including packaging and deployment) across cloud computing platforms.
* **Cloud backup** refers to backing up data to a remote, cloud-based server in cloud storage.
* **Cloud backup solutions** enable enterprises or individuals to store/backup data to a cloud storage service as opposed to a local, physical disk backup. 
* **Cloud enablement** is the process of creating a public cloud computing environment by making one or more the services available: CSP, client and application.
* **Cloud management** is the software and technology designed for operating and monitoring the services and data residing in the cloud. Cloud management tools help ensure that cloud based resources are functioning optimally.
* **Cloud OS** is a phrase frequently used in place of *PaaS* to denote an association to cloud computing.
* **Cloud portability** refers to the ability to move applications and associated data from one CSP to another.
* **Eucalyptus** is an open source cloud computing and IaaS platform for enabling AWS-compatible private and hybrid clouds.


# Why use Cloud Computing?
* Cost of ownership current IT infrastructure
  * Projected costs of maintaining IT infrastructure.
* Shift from Capital Expenditure (CapEx) -> Operational Expenditure (OpEx).
* Reduce IT complexity:
  * **Risk reduction**: test in the cloud before making major investments to solutions.
  * *Scalability*: On-demand access to cloud resources.
  * **Elasticity**: The environment transparently manages resource utilization based on dynamically changing needs.
* Consumption-based pricing
  * **Virtualizaion**: Single view of the available resources, independent of their arangement in terms of physical devices
  * **Cost**: Pay-per-use (PAYG) model allows an organisation to pay for only the resources it needs with no physical investment requirement.
* Business agility
  * **Mobility**: Accessible from around the globe.
  * **Collaboration and innovation**: The cloud is a way to work simultaneously on common data and information.

Cloud Computing issues and concerns:
* Distributed Multitenant Security Environment (Business Ecosystem)
* Risk (Business/Reputation)
* Compliance (Legal/Regulatory)
* Privacy

# Risk

Frameworks to address risk:
* Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology (COBIT)
* Comittee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) Enterprise Risk Management Integrated
* NIST Risk Management

To manage reputational risk, an organisation should consider:
 * Strategic alignment
  * Effective board oversight
  * Integration of risk into strategy setting and business planning
 * Cultural alignment
  * Strong corporate values and a focus on compliance
 * Operational focus


Measure security through:
 * Technological components
 * Risk management process
 * Preventative, detective and corrective controls
 * Governance and oversigt processes
 * Resilience and continuity capabilities
 * Defence in depth
 * Multifactor authentication


