+++
date = "2016-10-13T23:26:19+01:00"
course = "(ISC)²"
module = "CCSP (Certified Cloud Security Professional)"
title = "1. Architectural Concepts and Design Requirements"
latex = true
+++

# Introduction

The building blocks necessary to develop cloud-based systems.


# Objectives

* Define the various roles, characteristics, and technologies as they relate to cloud computing concepts.
* Describe cloud computing concepts as they relate to cloud computing activities, capabilities, categories, models, and cross-cutting aspects.
* Identify the design principles necessary for secure cloud computing.
* Define the various design principles for the different types of cloud categories.
* Identify criteria specific to national, international, and industry for certifying trusted cloud services.
* Identify criteria specific to the system and subsystem product certification.


# Definitions

* **Cloud computing** is the use of Internet-based computing resources, typically "as a service", to allow internal or external customers to consume where scalabale and elastic information technology (IT) enabled capabilities are provided.

* A **Managed Service Provider (MSP)** tends to have:
  * Network Operations Center (NOC) service.
  * Help desk service.
  * Remote monitoring and management of all or most of the objects for the customer.
  * Proactive maintenance of the objects under management for the customer.
  * Delivery of these solutions with a predictable billing model, the customer knows what the IT management expense will be.
  * e.g. [Armor](https://www.armor.com/)

* A **Cloud Service Provider (CSP)** dictates the technology and operational procedures made available. The CSP offers cloud computing through Software as a Service (SaaS), Infastructure as a Service (IaaS), or Platform as a Service (PaaS).
  * e.g. AWS, GCP, Azure

# Why use Cloud Computing?
* Cost of ownership current IT infrastructure
  * Projected costs of maintaining IT infrastructure.
* Shift from Capital Expenditure (CapEx) -> Operational Expenditure (OpEx).
* Reduce IT complexity:
  * **Risk reduction**: test in the cloud before making major investments to solutions.
  * *Scalability*: On-demand access to cloud resources.
  * **Elasticity**: The environment transparently manages resource utilization based on dynamically changing needs.
* Consumption-based pricing
  * **Virtualizaion**: Single view of the available resources, independent of their arangement in terms of physical devices
  * **Cost**: Pay-per-use (PAYG) model allows an organisation to pay for only the resources it needs with no physical investment requirement.
* Business agility
  * **Mobility**: Accessible from around the globe.
  * **Collaboration and innovation**: The cloud is a way to work simultaneously on common data and information.

Cloud Computing issues and concerns:
* Distributed Multitenant Security Environment (Business Ecosystem)
* Risk (Business/Reputation)
* Compliance (Legal/Regulatory)
* Privacy

Frameworks to address risk:
* Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology (COBIT)
* Comittee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) Enterprise Risk Management Integrated
* NIST Risk Management
